[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: I don't
think there is one among us who
is not subconsciously affected
by painful experiences
of the past.
For many, these deep
feelings have cut us off
from the very
things we long for.
Then we go through
an entire life
without digging down to
discover the source of the pain.
Dr. Robert Bleck has
been taking people back
to the source of
pain for decades,
and he's here with his
salient observations
after decades of
doing this work.
Thank you for joining
us here from New York.
>>ROBERT BLECK: Thank you.
Nice to be here.
>>REGINA: First of all, you
do Source Completion Therapy,
and I think maybe
let's just start out
first with what that means.
And then we can start filling
in the rest of the story.
>>BLECK: Sure, it's a
therapy that I created.
And it's basically a
three-phase therapeutic process
that's designed to deep cleanse
and heal emotional wounds.
>>REGINA: Yes, and
in your book you
put a lot of-- which I
love, I like anecdotes.
I want to see examples of where
that particular event trapped
a particular individual
in, you know,
a limitation, a very
limiting pattern,
sometimes even
destructive patterns.
And you do a really good
job of illustrating this.
And not only that, you're
a really good writer.
>>BLECK: Thank you.
I appreciate it.
>>REGINA: I mean,
have you thought
of just writing for a living?
>>BLECK: I've thought about
it, writing other books,
but it was so exhausting
to write this.
It was painful for me.
>>REGINA: Was it?
You're such a natural.
You write beautifully.
It almost reads like a
novel in its craftsmanship.
>>BLECK: Well, you're very kind.
What was painful was when
I went back to the scenes
that I had created--
>>REGINA: Oh, I
would believe that.
>>BLECK: --of the people.
I felt their pain, so
it was difficult for me.
>>REGINA: Well, you seem
to be very empathic.
You seem like a
very sensitive man.
So why did you choose
this line of work?
>>BLECK: Well, that's
a good question.
It starts when I
was a little boy.
I always felt an empathy and a
sympathy for those struggling
and in pain in life
when I was young,
but there was one incident
that actually cemented my path
to do this.
I was on a vacation.
I was with a few
fraternity brothers,
and we decided to
go to Puerto Rico.
Were near the water.
And the beach was pristine,
and the hotel was glittering.
But I decided to take
a tour to the inland,
and the poverty that I saw was
staggering and very painful.
And I made a commitment
that I'd like to make
a contribution to humanity.
So I decided to continue
on in psychology
and a few years
later get my PhD.
And then I was armed
with many, many theories
and many, many techniques, but
none seemed complete enough
for me and for the
people I was working with
to really make permanent changes
and really heal the person.
So by trial and error and by
sequencing different aspects
of different theories, I
came up with this sequence,
and it became known as
Source Completion Therapy.
>>REGINA: Does it
require a person
to actually live
that past experience,
or just to kind of tap
in and feel it again?
Or what's required
of the client?
>>BLECK: OK, the first phase
in the process is awareness.
So many people, if they've
been hurt in their childhood,
they repress the pain,
and they suppress it.
Especially children,
it's so abhorrent,
what's happening to them,
they would short circuit.
So their brain as a
protective mechanism just
represses, stuffs it down as
my people like to call it.
And what happens, in
order to get healed,
they have to be aware
of who hurt them.
That's the first step.
So that would be the first step.
So who hurt them?
What don't they want to feel?
How were they hurt?
Why were they hurt?
When did it happen?
And then the second
phase is called reliving.
For that, they do have
to go back in time,
and I help them through
visualization, self hypnosis,
to go back to all the sights,
the sounds, the feelings,
the smells, the
entire situation.
And that brings the
feelings up to the surface.
And then the third phase is they
confront the person who hurt
them with effective feedback.
Now, some people don't
want to go that deep.
>>REGINA: Right, I would think.
Even some of the examples
you used in the book,
I don't know that I'd
want to go back there.
>>BLECK: Right, very
painful, very intense,
this is an intense process.
Some people get scared of it.
It takes courage to do it
and courage to move on.
The more they go back, the
more cleansed they are,
basically is what
happens because if they
don't go back far enough,
some of it still stays in.
And it always
comes out in what I
call in the book
these diversions,
whether it's an
obsession, a phobia.
>>REGINA: Oh, we're going
to talk about all the ways
in which we divert because
we all do one or the other.
>>BLECK: Correct.
>>REGINA: And the name of the
book is "Give Back Your Pain,"
so it's critical that you
address it and put it back
on the source that delivered it.
>>BLECK: Right, it seemed
to make the most sense,
and it was the sequence
that was healing
the people I was working with.
So I was happy.
>>REGINA: How about
your own childhood?
>>BLECK: Well, I had
difficulties with it,
my mother in particular.
But I used this
process, and that
was working for me as well.
And my people ask me that.
Well, did you go
through this process,
because you tell us to do it?
And I say, absolutely,
or I wouldn't
be telling you to do it.
>>REGINA: Yes, OK, good,
we've got that out.
Now in the book, you take
people back to their infancy.
And you've said in there that if
your needs do not go answered,
it sets up a cascade of
negative events in our life.
And then it made me think back
to one of the advice books,
I think it was from the 1950s,
maybe Dr. Spock, something
about letting the kids cry out.
You don't soothe babies.
You let them cry it out and
learn this is a tough place,
and they've got to get over it.
Whoa.
>>BLECK: I think that is
absurd, and it's ridiculous.
>>REGINA: It's so cruel.
>>BLECK: It's cruel,
mean, inhuman,
and I never did it with my son.
And if anyone asked me,
I'd say, don't do it.
The child will outgrow that.
You get up.
You meet his needs.
He would be fine then.
He would feel safe.
He would feel protected
He won't [INAUDIBLE].
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about what happens
if someone is, say, an exhausted
parent, an unskilled parent,
or they're buying that
from their grandmothers.
And they say, oh, just
let him cry it out.
He'll stop sooner or later.
What happens to our psyche?
>>BLECK: Well, what happens
is feelings of feeling
unsafe, unprotected,
unloved, uncared for.
They stay inside, and
they will come out later.
There's no doubt.
In all the years I've been
doing this, they will come out.
No matter what you try, exercise
programs, diet, relaxation
techniques, they will come
out in some form or another.
>>REGINA: Do you find this with
quite a few of your clients
through the years, that
starting really early on,
nobody responded to
what they needed?
Is this a pretty common pattern?
>>BLECK: With the ones I
do work with, yes, not only
didn't they respond to what they
needed, but some were beaten.
Some were sexually abused.
Some were raped by their
fathers or their step-fathers.
So it's various
ways you get abused.
Some were just
neglected totally.
>>REGINA: Yeah, well, let's
talk about-- go ahead.
>>BLECK: I'm just remembering
one of the clients.
>>REGINA: Please,
share the stories.
>>BLECK: He was an alcoholic.
And what happened, he
remembers-- when we went back
into his childhood, he
actually remembered the crib
that he was in.
It was down a
long, dark hallway.
No one came.
He could see these shadows,
his parents talking,
and he remembers wishing that he
could reach the shadows to have
some kind of comfort and love.
And nobody came, and
then he remembers
getting up in the crib
and shaking the bars
and just crying and crying until
he just fell asleep crying.
And then, years later
when he came to me,
we brought this out,
but he was an alcoholic,
to anesthetize that pain.
So I never tell anybody.
They ask me.
Because people who I
see, they have children.
They get married.
And, well, should
we let them cry?
Our pediatrician is
telling us to do that.
I say, never do that.
>>REGINA: Ever.
>>REGINA: No, in fact, my
son, when he was sleepy,
he used to like to stay up.
And he used to like us to
be with him in the crib.
But we got to a point
where he was getting older,
so we went into our
bedroom, my wife and I.
And then he was crying.
I said, well, let's put
a sleeping bag by our bed
and let him come in
anytime he wants.
So he would come in for a few
years, whenever he wanted to,
just hold my hand as I reached
to the side, fell asleep.
And then, sure enough,
a year or two later,
he went into his own
bed, and that was it.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I mean, there
is a natural process in there,
some societies, often indigenous
societies in particular,
where it's considered a crime
to let a child even sleep alone.
Until they get to
be a certain age,
you have the company
of your parents,
your siblings, your tribe.
You don't sleep alone with
the mysteries of the night
surrounding you.
>>BLECK: Correct, correct,
there is no purpose in that.
I don't know why those books
are still in existence.
>>REGINA: I don't either because
of that inherent cruelty in it.
And with my son, it was similar,
although he didn't cry much.
By five weeks, he was
sleeping through the night.
And then he'd take a good,
long nap during the day,
you know, two, even
three hours sometimes,
and it was the opposite.
I was the irritating one.
I'd go and walk by and bump the
crib, hoping he might wake up
so I say, hi, honey.
And so I was disturbing
his sleep, rather than
him disturbing mine.
>>BLECK: That's funny.
Well, he must have felt safe
and secure with you, I'm sure.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah,
and vice versa,
whenever his energy was in the
room, it was just like a tonic
to my energy field
and vice versa.
>>BLECK: That's lovely.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it
was, so I didn't
have a lot of that crying
through the night thing
to deal with.
So I can't be judgmental
about it, you know.
So you call these cancers of
the past, these events that
happen in our lives,
and you say they
are as trapped in our bodies
as a physical disease.
>>BLECK: It's like that.
It's like if you
get food poisoning,
your body wants to eliminate it.
In the case of emotions
that you store,
also your subconscious
wants to eliminate it.
It doesn't like it in there.
It's really kind of eating us
away because it's coming out.
It's being pushed out
in these other things.
So they are like a cancer
because they just fester inside
until they are released.
That's why I call it that.
>>REGINA: And you say
that we can't really
be open to all of the magic and
all of the beauty in our lives
until we've rid
ourselves of whatever
these toxins, these
emotional toxins are.
>>BLECK: Absolutely, I
say that, and I see how
it is for the people at work.
I see how it is for myself.
Absolutely, that's the truth
in my book, in my work.
So you must release
those poisons
in order to be open to
the wonder and majesty
that life can be.
Yes, I do say that.
>>REGINA: Yes, but
you also have to be
able to recognize
kind of the symptoms
of your emotional wounds.
Now we didn't bring the book
out on the table with us,
but on page 14 it talks
about the symptoms.
Can you tell us
so each one of us
can see ourselves in
this conversation?
>>BLECK: Oh, sure,
there's plenty of them.
You could be feeling worthless,
inadequate, defective.
You could have obsessions.
You could have phobias.
You could feel
afraid of commitment.
You could feel withdrawn.
You could feel you have
to be a perfectionist
to get approval in life.
>>REGINA: Right, and there
is a really common one
which is fear of judgment.
>>BLECK: Correct.
>>REGINA: A lot of people
are afraid of judgment.
>>BLECK: Right,
because in their house,
they could have had
a father or an uncle
or a mother just judge them and
criticize them continuously.
And then they grew up that way.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm, and if
they don't do it themselves,
they're still a slave-- I
mean, the beautiful thing
about having a
chance to be a parent
is that you can reverse
some of these patterns
within your own kind of
family history, your ancestral
history.
It doesn't have to be
passed down to your child,
but it doesn't mean that you're
not still more or less a slave
to it yourself.
>>BLECK: Yes, well, talking
about passing it down,
that's what happens a lot,
unless the person goes
into some help or
treatment or understands
what's happening to them.
So most of my
clients, they thank me
for saving their life and
their children's lives,
so it is rewarding for me.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah, just what
you wanted to do, you know.
So you talk about
the ways in which
we kind of deflect attention
from our own emotions.
And one of it is through
the use of language.
And I thought that was
really interesting,
to depersonalize something
by using the word, it,
or you, for example, or
everybody and people.
So I would like you
to give examples
of what you're talking about
there, what it's actually
covering up, and what
the person really
is or should be saying
when they do this,
because I think we all do it.
>>BLECK: Most people do, yes.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I just said, we.
I would never say,
of course, I do that.
>>BLECK: Well, just a simple
one, you know what it's like.
Your father comes home,
and he's an alcoholic.
And everybody scatters.
No one wants to be with him.
You know it's like.
You've experienced it.
So compare it to,
you know, I had
a father who was an alcoholic.
And when he came
home, I was terrified.
I was scared, and I just
hid under my covers.
So there's a difference
in intensity and potency.
>>REGINA: Absolutely,
so talk about
that a little bit with some of
the clients you've worked with.
What happens when they
simply-- because I'm
sure when they come in and first
sit down, this is their story.
>>BLECK: Right, yes.
>>REGINA: When they
first start talking,
maybe give us an example or two.
What happens when
you actually own it
on a very personal level?
>>BLECK: Well, if it was
an example like I gave you,
you know, my father,
he was cruel,
mean, neglectful, judgemental,
never told me I was pretty,
was absent.
What was more
important to him was
the ice in the
alcoholic drink, so I
would hear that in my head.
So personally, that's
what started it.
It hurt.
It hurt to have a
father like that.
It hurt, was there, a body
part, in the generic air.
I says, no, I really hurt.
And then the person
has to hear it,
and then they're starting
to feel the experience
and the pain of it.
And that's what's
crucial in my therapy.
You have to feel
the pain, and that's
what brings it to the surface
so it can be released.
>>REGINA: So let's say we're
not in the therapist's office.
Let's just say we're in
a normal relationship.
Let's say we're even in
a marital relationship,
or, you know, a
personal relationship
that has some kind
of depth, where
it does trigger things in you.
It seems to me that's what
you're speaking about here
would be a very
wise practice really
for anyone in a relationship
to another human being,
to just become aware
of this language issue.
>>BLECK: Yes, it's a good
thing to do for all of us
because we don't want to even
stuff feelings in the present
because, again, if you stuff
these feelings in the present,
that will fester.
So you always want
to be in touch
with the feelings on the
depth and the intensity
and be aware of that.
Be aware of what you're feeling.
>>REGINA: How about kids?
Are kids more
direct, or have they
already learned to camouflage
it by their use of language?
>>BLECK: It depends how hurt
they are or how safe they feel.
If they are, if they
feel nurtured and loved
and cared for, a lot of children
that I've seen or have worked
with, they are OK with it.
They understand an
I. Others don't.
And others will
suffer and do suffer.
>>REGINA: And the language
is relational to the kind
of experience.
>>BLECK: I think so.
Yes, I do think that.
>>REGINA: They're not safe to
tell the truth, so to speak,
to speak in personal terms.
>>BLECK: It's a protective
way of doing it, if they say,
you, or a person, or a friend.
Also the language of I
guess, maybe, probably
is also diversionary.
It pushes the experience out.
>>REGINA: Like, I guess maybe
that wasn't the maybe best,
you know, like that, yeah.
>>BLECK: Yeah, versus,
well, no, when he beat me,
I really hurt deep down.
And I felt shame.
And I withdrew, versus
I guess it hurt me.
It's really the
difference in owning that.
It's very powerful.
>>REGINA: And how
often do you find--
I'm not looking for
numbers, really, but just
an experience-- that people
then somehow blame themselves
for these things that
happened to them?
>>BLECK: Oh, a lot do.
They think that they're
defective and inadequate.
>>REGINA: And
deserved it somehow?
>>BLECK: Some, yes,
deserved it, or they just
felt they're inherently,
genetically defective
because if I wasn't defective,
my father would have loved me.
And no matter what
I did, he didn't.
>>REGINA: Well, it makes
sense because as a child,
you're automatically
putting your parents
in the superior role.
>>BLECK: Correct.
>>REGINA: They're right.
They're your parents.
>>BLECK: Correct.
>>REGINA: So if they're
doing something bad to you,
it's your fault.
>>BLECK: Right, that's how
they feel, and they grow up
feeling that way.
And it's hard to break that.
People I see, they do break it,
if they go back to the source.
But it's very painful
for them because they
take that defectiveness to every
relationship that they have.
>>REGINA: Give us an
example of some of that.
I mean, you have
a lot of examples
in your book of someone whose
self-worth was just so low,
and then they go out and up
in kind of serial situations.
Do you have an example
you can share with us
of how that shows itself?
>>BLECK: Well, someone
who feels defective,
I can give you an example
of a person in business.
He felt really unloved by his
parents, especially his mother.
She was cold and distant.
And any affection he would get,
in the form of a camera picture
that his father had taken, she
would smile for the picture,
but never for him afterwards.
So he was really hurt,
and he felt so unloved.
And whatever relationship
he has now, or recently,
he would transfer that feeling
of defectiveness to it.
So if it was in
business, he would
feel he's not good enough.
What is he doing wrong?
You know, I can't
make this better.
There's something wrong with me.
And that would plague
him and hurt him deeply
until he ended this process.
And we said, well,
the defectiveness
you weren't born with.
It's what your
parents made you feel.
And he does understand it now,
and he still works with me.
>>REGINA: Was this
completely hidden
from his own self-awareness?
>>BLECK: Correct, correct.
>>REGINA: Is that
generally the case?
Or do some people
come in and say,
I know it's got to be
some issue of self-esteem?
I know this used to
happen when I was young.
Do most people have an
awareness of where it came from?
>>BLECK: It varies.
It's different shades.
The gentleman that I just spoke
about, he came in and told
me he had a great childhood.
His parents were terrific.
So that was one.
Another, I work now with
a young entrepreneur,
and he was referred to
me by a local hospital.
He thought he was
having a heart attack.
He had pain down his arms.
His heart was beating
out his chest,
it felt like,
throat was closing.
He was terrified.
He thought he was dying.
A hospital gave
him all the tests.
And they said, you
had a panic attack,
so we're referring
you to Dr. Bleck.
So he came and saw me,
and he was terrified.
And I explained to
him what was going on,
what a panic attack
basically is.
I used a glass of
water, and I said, OK.
What a panic attack
is, imagine the glass
filled to the top with water.
And that's all the feelings that
you've stored inside for years.
Just take the stress
of everyday life.
You put a few drops in.
It overflows.
It's like your psyche
is in short circuit.
Your body is in short circuit.
Everything is haywire,
and that's a panic attack.
OK, he said, so
how do we help it?
I said, well, tell me about
what's happened in your past.
What don't you want to feel?
And he started discussing
it, and he's much better now.
And he has no more
panic attacks,
and the relationships
he has in business
are much better as well.
>>REGINA: Why did he feel
overwhelmed to begin with?
>>BLECK: Very stressful,
the work that he does,
his business.
He has a number of
businesses, and that stress,
getting those extra drops,
pushed him over the list.
But it's allowed.
He wasn't even thinking
about it, you know,
and now he's terrific
at the process.
He goes back.
He calls.
I have to source it, Doc,
meaning I have to go back
and see where these
feelings really belong.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and in some
cases, such as, you know,
a stressful business day
or events that occur,
someone might be a little
more open to going back
into that then incest
or something really
deep and horrible
from their childhood.
>>BLECK: Correct, usually
when they work with me,
they know they are going
to go back, you know.
>>REGINA: Because they
know what you do, yeah.
>>BLECK: Correct.
Correct.
I say that.
I ask them before.
You know, are you
aware of what I do?
Most of them do.
They get referrals by people
that have been with me.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about
the role of the clown.
We all know people who tend
to laugh at everything.
Everything, you know, is like
the world is one big joke,
but there is a nervousness
that underlies the laughter.
So what is the hallmark
deep inside of the clown?
And I know you have a couple
of anecdotes in your book.
>>BLECK: I do.
Well, let's say, I talk about a
comedian I had seen years ago.
He was on that one
of the talk shows,
and he was telling fat jokes.
He happened to be heavy.
And everybody's hysterical
in the audience.
They're laughing.
He says, well, the
pilot asked me to move
to the other side of the plane.
I had to balance out the
plane to make it fly.
And the audience is
really hysterical.
And he had to take two seats
in the theater, you know.
So I said, I don't
think that's funny.
I think something's wrong.
And sure enough--
>>REGINA: You talked to him.
Or did you see him?
>>BLECK: I saw him
on another talk show.
Someone was asking
him about his life.
And sure enough, he said
his father was an alcoholic,
and he left his family
for another woman.
And it devastated him, and
he never talked about it.
And he used both food
and humor, comedy,
to divert from that pain.
And that was it, so people
who use humor, laughter,
when it's inappropriate, most
people are aware of that.
A lot of people do that.
>>REGINA: A lot of people do it.
>>BLECK: Correct.
>>REGINA: In the Western world.
>>BLECK: They do, and I
never really find it funny.
They use sarcasm, which
I don't find funny.
When someone is sarcastic,
they are deflecting again
their feelings.
They're focusing on
someone else's weaknesses
rather than looking
inside of themselves,
so that's really
what's going on.
>>REGINA: And some of
it is just so subtle.
I mean, I've been
confused over it
because I know some people
who are very capable.
They seem very
confident in their lives
and excellent at what they do.
But everything is
hidden up with a laugh.
So what is that laugh
actually saying?
>>BLECK: It's diverted.
It means that they're
diverting from something.
I don't know unless I've spoke
to them or saw something.
>>REGINA: Yeah, so it's just
another form general diversion?
>>BLECK: It is.
I don't know.
There are so many
ways we divert.
So, you know, that's one of
the forms, criticism of others.
>>REGINA: Well, we're
going to go there next.
Let's talk about
that, where you have
very strong patterns of
criticism, of everybody else
is wrong.
And I was sitting
next to someone
on the airplane the other
day, having at his wife.
And the pilot was
doing-- everybody
was wrong in his world.
And I thought, oh, gosh,
that must be painful.
>>BLECK: Right, right,
so this person is really
hurting inside.
So he focuses on everybody
else and criticizes them
so he doesn't have to look
internally and feel that pain.
So that's what that is.
>>REGINA: Rage,
because people, you
know-- I tend to know people
who have worked on themselves.
They've tried to figure
out the essence of life
and their place in
it and so forth.
But still, something
happens and boom.
You see this rage come
pouring out of them,
roaring out of them, and--
>>BLECK: It's scary, isn't it?
>>REGINA: Yeah, I saw it
last weekend in someone,
and I was absolutely shocked.
I was witnessed happening
from one person to another.
I thought, oh, my God.
What's under there?
Where does it come from?
I live in kind of a
new-age community,
so that makes it all
the more shocking
because you don't
behave like that, right?
Let's talk about rage.
>>BLECK: Well,
again, it's a person
who has been abused or damaged
or betrayed in some way.
Again, they stuff that feeling
down, and it's in there.
OK, it's in there.
I have an example in the
book of a rage experience
that I had on the Long
Island Expressway.
I'm from New York.
>>REGINA: Yes, tell us about it.
>>BLECK: Yeah, sometimes it
looks like a parking lot,
it's get so crowded.
And one day, I was with my
wife, and we were driving.
And it was bumper to
bumper-- actually, stopped.
The traffic was stopped.
And I'm looking in the mirror
because I hear honking.
And it's a pickup truck.
A gentleman in a pickup
truck is honking the horn.
There was no way to go.
I couldn't go to the right.
I couldn't go to the left.
>>REGINA: It's a parking lot.
>>BLECK: Correct, so there's
totally nowhere to go,
and I'm uncomfortable, you know.
It's getting a little scary.
And then finally, we start to
move-- because his hand was
on the horn.
His hand was on the horn,
and I went like this.
So he pulls around finally.
We start to move, maybe
three miles an hour.
And he pulls up to me
and starts cursing at me,
saying, learn how to drive.
And I'm not going
to say the curses.
And if you don't, I'll
get out of the car,
and I'll slap your face.
So what I know from what I do
is that he's not seeing me.
He's enraged at
someone else, anger
that he has stored for
most of his life, probably.
And it's just a way of
deflecting it onto me.
So I do know that,
but it is scary
when you see that in real life.
>>REGINA: Well,
everybody experiences it,
either in themselves
or in someone else,
especially on the road because
here you're driving along.
You consider anyone
else an impediment,
and they're anonymous.
So this seems to be a place
for particularly bad behavior.
>>BLECK: It is.
>>REGINA: You wouldn't do
it in a grocery store line,
right to someone's face, but you
can't see their face, you know,
especially if you're behind them
and you're moving at a pace.
And that anonymity
seems to embolden
people to behave even worse.
>>BLECK: It does.
It does.
Even though when you don't
have the anonymity, like,
I've seen people get rageful.
I have my coffee in the
morning at a local diner.
And at times, I see
people get angry, furious,
at the waiter or waitress
for some minor infraction.
So it's not that
anonymous there,
but they're protected
by one serving them.
So they think they can
bully the other person.
>>REGINA: So let's say
you're on the road, you know,
or in a diner and you have
a slow waiter or something.
And you feel that blood
rising up inside yourself,
and you're getting impatient.
And you're like, come on.
What do you suggest?
Because I think most people
go through that experience.
That means most people have
rage at some place buried
inside themselves.
>>BLECK: I would agree.
>>REGINA: How do you recommend
the average person confront
rage in themselves?
Because they're not all going
to go to the therapist or even
read the book.
>>BLECK: No, well,
it's really simple,
if they want to really know
the answer to that question.
What I tell people is,
just ask yourself, well,
what don't I want to feel?
And who really made me rageful?
And what feelings have I been
storing for all those years?
>>REGINA: That's it.
A couple questions
and pretty much boom.
When the who comes
up, you see it.
>>BLECK: Who caused the rage?
Who made you this angry?
It can't be me.
You don't really
know me that well.
I couldn't have caused this.
Somebody else in
your life hurt you
or betrayed you in some way.
>>REGINA: Do you get a lot
of anger directed at you
during your therapy sessions?
>>BLECK: At first, when my
clients first start coming--
>>REGINA: You start
hitting the soft spots.
>>BLECK: Yes, and I had
to make a rule, actually.
Before they actually
start the therapy,
I say, you're not allowed
to throw anything at me,
because you might
get angry at me.
And, you know, you
can't punch me.
You can't kick me.
OK, physical harm to
me is not allowed.
I have to say that actually
because what happens
is when I start
probing them, they'll
get so angry at the
questions because they
don't want to touch this.
So that's one source of anger.
And the other is
all of a sudden,
they think I'm the
person who hurt them.
They'll transfer that
anger because I'm a man.
And it was a man that hurt them,
their father or their husband.
So that comes out in two ways.
So I had to cushion myself.
>>REGINA: For a
sensitive guy, yeah,
you do have to cushion yourself.
>>BLECK: I had to cushion
myself in many ways.
But the ones I have met for
years that work with me,
they're not at that level.
So they understand that.
And I just ask the question,
oh, who is this from?
It's from my father, you know.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
OK, done with that,
OK, so no anger, the
subject of anger,
because most
everybody has it, you
say you need to learn to discern
between diversionary anger
and genuine or justified
anger in some way.
Can you talk about
that a little bit,
because I'm sure people
can be confused over this?
>>BLECK: Diversionary anger
would be the rageful kind,
you know, that just comes up.
It has really no place.
It's inappropriate.
But I could be angry with
you if you promised me
you'd meet me somewhere,
you didn't show up,
and I was waiting an hour.
So I would be disappointed.
And I would be angry,
and I would be annoyed.
And that would be
appropriate feelings.
But if I was so rageful that
I grabbed you or hurt you
in some way, that would
be really inappropriate.
So that would be diversionary
because that infraction is not
enough to cause hurting
you in some way.
So that's the difference.
>>REGINA: OK, and you
say entire nations
go through these diversionary
practices with anger
and violence and that
wars even are often
a diversionary tactic at large.
>>BLECK: Yes, the
example in my book-- I
mean, the whole
world is doing that.
I mean, tons of
countries do that now.
>>REGINA: Create a war here.
Oh, what's going on over
there where no one's looking?
>>BLECK: Correct, the one in the
book, I mean, it's so powerful.
Germany, after World War
I, they were depressed.
They were starving.
They felt humiliated by
the European countries.
They built up their armed
forces, and they used war.
They went to war with
England and Poland
as a diversion for
those feelings.
>>REGINA: Of Humiliation.
>>BLECK: Correct,
humiliation was there also.
And then they started going
after races of people--
the Jews, blacks.
They went after religions.
The Bolsheviks, I believe,
they went after, too.
>>REGINA: And people who
were gay and practicing,
Gypsies, other lifestyles.
>>BLECK: Correct,
everyone who they felt
was different than them,
they went after them.
In the concentration camps, they
murdered millions and millions
in the name of a
diversion, basically
for not wanting to look at their
country, look at themselves.
>>REGINA: What's
that say about the US
and what we're doing and
have been doing for decades?
>>BLECK: Right, so
that's the same thing.
We divert our own problems,
economic or political, social,
and we give the people
a war to divert from it.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I mean, we
have major problems right now,
economically, serious
problems in the trenches.
And all we hear on the
nightly news is about war.
>>BLECK: Correct,
so it's just, again,
a diversion to keep us away,
from looking at ways that we
need to deal with it.
Even if those ways
are painful, maybe we
have to cut here, cut
there, and do what's right.
>>REGINA: And obsessions and
compulsions, that's a big one.
That's a big diversion.
They can look healthy.
I mean, some people
would say, wow.
That guy, he's
really good at that.
He's a little obsessed, but
he's really good at that.
But often underneath of it
is something else, right?
>>BLECK: Right,
well, one person I
had had a number of
compulsions and obsessions.
I'll go through that.
It was a woman.
I started seeing her in her 30s.
She would have a cigarette
in her hand or mouth
at the time, a drink
in the other hand,
and she would love to gamble.
So she had that.
And she'd take about five
showers a day, to keep clean.
She was obsessed with that.
She was functioning.
She was going to school and
taking care of the family.
One day, when she was
washing one of her sons,
he got annoyed with something.
And she started to
choke him in the shower.
So she came to me
and said, you know,
I don't want to hurt my babies.
Help me, please.
So we had to go back and look
at where these came from,
all these obsessions
and phobias.
They served the purpose of
her not dealing with the pain
from an alcoholic father who
was judgmental and critical and
abusive, who would
beat her brother.
She would hear the slaps and
the screams from her brother.
So all of that,
she'd just push down
with drinking and
smoking, gambling.
>>REGINA: She hit them all.
>>BLECK: Correct,
she had them all.
So that's an example of
a number of them there.
And there was one
person who was obsessed
with her physical health.
Any scratch, any
cough, any indigestion,
anything, she would
think she was going
to be brought to the
hospital, would be hooked up
to all the machines,
and all she would
hear was the beeps, the
buzzes, and she would be dying,
deteriorating.
>>REGINA: For everything.
>>BLECK: Everything.
>>REGINA: Yeah, you
would call that almost
like an extreme hypochondriac.
But, in fact, yeah,
I remember reading
about that in the book,
the extremes in her mind
that she went to for just a
tiny, like you say, a scratch.
She's dying.
It's a life-threatening
infection that's
going to get into your wound.
>>BLECK: Right, how
she came to see me,
she discovered a lump under
her ear, and she panicked.
She couldn't function anymore.
When they can't function
anymore, a lot of people
come in to me.
So it really goes into extremes.
She thought it
was cancer, so she
went to the doctor,
a number of doctors.
And they all told her it wasn't.
And they said it
was a lymph node.
She didn't believe
them, so she got
obsessed with poring
over the medical journals
and researching it.
And finally, they gave her all
the tests that she asked for.
It was OK.
And then she coughed, and
then she went on to pneumonia.
She thought she had pneumonia,
so it was a constant.
>>REGINA: So sad.
>>BLECK: Yes, very
sad, tormented.
>>REGINA: Tormented, yes,
what about the notion
of the connection
between-- this is
one we hear about commonly--
but your experience of it,
sexual abuse and overeating
for women in particular?
>>BLECK: Yes, it is common.
They use that as a
diversion, you know,
and then they'll obsess.
That becomes an obsession also.
They'll hate themselves after
they overeat, or binge eat,
I call it.
And they are out of
control with eating,
and it's very tormenting,
very torturous.
So they're tortured in two ways.
They're tortured by what was
done to them in the past,
and then the obsession of
the food is also torturous.
So they're just
really in misery.
>>REGINA: What about the type
of brain chemicals involved
with being raped or molested,
especially as a child,
and then the crossover to
eating, because a lot of time
it's usually carbohydrates
and that kind of thing?
>>BLECK: OK, I'm not
that familiar with that.
I'm familiar with the serotonin
levels and norepinephrine
levels.
What happens in
there, any really
stress that's
happening to a person,
serotonin and
norepinephrine basically
are our body's
natural tranquilizers.
We go to sleep without
taking a pill, most of us.
But when you're experiencing
such trauma and such stress
at such high,
emotionally-intense levels,
your serotonin levels and
norepinephrine levels,
they drop.
With a lot of people, they
experience that with me.
I work with a psychiatrist
who I refer to.
He gets their levels
up, and then we
can go through my
therapy, my process.
>>REGINA: But they have
to have that intact
beforehand because it
could be too destructive?
>>BLECK: Correct, they could
get clinically depressed then.
And then they don't
go out of the house,
and they just want
to kill themselves.
Like, they're suicidal.
So the psychiatrist, he
knows that I refer to him,
and he'll get them
on the medication.
That helps them start
to function again.
But then I said,
well, then now we
have to go back because
once they start functioning,
we go back to heal them.
>>REGINA: And I
think that would be
some of the more painful
type of experiences.
And I have to say,
about 20 years ago
I became aware, on
a personal level,
of friends, friends
and even a couple
of kind of distant
family members,
how prevalent sexual abuse was.
I had no idea.
It's pretty common.
>>BLECK: Yes, it's very common.
It's a lot in my book.
If you've read it,
it's all over, yes.
>>REGINA: And if it's not in
your family, you tend to think,
oh, well this is just some kind
of extreme example of someone
whose dad went berserk.
But it's certainly
not in the norm.
But that's not a fair statement.
It's been prevalent throughout
history, across all cultures,
across classes.
Doesn't seem to be just--
>>BLECK: It is.
It is prevalent, and
it's heartbreaking
because it continues.
And it depresses me
just to know that.
I do the best I can to heal,
but it's a very sad commentary
on society.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm, and there
are a lot of other implications
if you want to go
metaphysical on it, too.
>>BLECK: And, again, it can
happen in any household,
like you were saying.
And I'm just going to give
you another example where
the household had
seemed on the outside,
everybody, oh, they
had a lovely family.
The mother was a
professional, the father.
The woman that I'm
going to talk about,
she came to me, also
in her late 30s,
with a number of symptoms,
a lot of withdrawal,
difficulty in commitment
to relationships.
And what we uncovered
was that when
she was about four
years old, her father
would come into her bed
each night and make her rub
him in the genital area.
And she really
deposited that down
and stuffed it and repressed
that down very, very deeply.
>>REGINA: So tell us
more about that woman.
>>BLECK: Yes, so he would
make this little girl
rub him each night.
And she, you know, is
depressed, all these feelings.
And what she did
as she grew older
to make sure that
they were repressed,
she used what's called numbing.
It's another diversion.
She numbed herself
so much physically
and emotionally that she
would go to a mirror.
And she would look in the mirror
and take a knife or a scalpel,
and she would cut her
cheeks to make sure she
couldn't feel any pain.
And when she knew she
wasn't feeling any pain,
she felt great
because she says, I'm
still not able to feel any pain.
>>REGINA: Wow.
>>BLECK: So that's
really, really powerful.
>>REGINA: Did she
have scars all over?
>>BLECK: I didn't see them.
I didn't see them.
>>REGINA: She must have
just done little cuts,
and they healed OK.
But still, to think that a
person has to go that far just
to prove they can't
feel something horrible
that was perpetrated.
>>BLECK: Correct, and that's
a powerful example of that.
>>REGINA: There was
another situation
about transference
and projection
in your book which
is pretty common.
And it was about
a man named Kenny
who had had early
bed-wetting experiences.
He ended up hating all women.
Let's talk about Kenny and what
happened with him, sensitive,
little guy.
>>BLECK: He was
sensitive, very sensitive.
Well, he was wetting his
bed, and he was older.
He was four or five or six.
And his mother had
no patience, and she
thought by humiliating
him, it would
get him to change that, it
would get him to stop wetting.
So what she would do in the
morning when he went to school,
she would hang his
sheets out of the window
so when his classmates
would walk by,
they would see what he has done.
And so little Kenny felt
humiliated and shamed and maybe
something, again, defective,
like something was wrong with.
So he transferred
all those feelings
onto every woman,
women teachers.
He thought that they were
going to hurt him in some way.
Women that he would try to
have some relationships with,
he was mistrustful always.
So it was very sad.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
that poor guy, it
sounds like he had one
relationship after another
and just always
ended up transferring
that hatred on them.
>>BLECK: Correct, and
fear, it was hatred
and fear and humiliation.
He felt that they were
going to humiliate him.
And, well, he came to me.
We worked it through, and
he ended a relationship.
And it's fine.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and in your
book, you give these examples.
And you also have, like,
the self scripting.
For a person to help themselves
go through this recognition
process in areas that they
have been extremely limited in,
or their joy, or their
productivity in life
has been limited,
it's almost always
from something of
the past, right?
>>BLECK: Yes.
>>REGINA: And your
intention, I assume,
was to allow people--
not everybody is going
to be able to fly to
New York and do this,
right-- was to allow people
to take this on on their own.
>>BLECK: Yes, that's why
I did write this book.
I wanted the public
to understand
the mechanisms for their
pain and their diversions
and their symptoms.
And I wanted to do it in a clear
way because a lot of the books
I read, even when I
was going to school,
seemed kind of
convoluted and not clear.
So I wanted to give the lay
person a chance at healing.
So that was the purpose
of writing this book.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and as I
said, you did a beautiful job.
That's why I'm saying, write
some fantasy or fiction.
You're just such
a beautiful writer
that it makes it a
breeze to go through,
although some of the anecdotes,
of course, are quite painful.
One area that we
don't have enough time
to go into with
a lot of depth is
the notion of dreams
and then also working
with your dream time.
And so from your
therapeutic point of view,
what does that look like?
>>BLECK: Well, what I
like to have a person do
with their dreams is every
person or thing in the dream
represents a part of themselves.
So that's how I like to help
them interpret the dream.
So if you'd like me to
go through one of those--
>>REGINA: Yes, do.
>>BLECK: OK, one of the ones
in the book that I particularly
like, this gentleman
saw himself up
at the top of a roller
coaster on a hill.
He was on the tracks.
He was straddling the tracks,
but he was on top of it.
And on the sides of
the tracks, going up,
were different people.
And at the very bottom was
this rageful man with a spear.
So this person, watching
a person with a spear,
he would spear each
person on the tracks
and throw them over the side.
>>REGINA: Jeez,
what an awful dream.
>>BLECK: Right, and everyone,
he would spear all of them.
And he knew the-- my person.
>>REGINA: [INAUDIBLE]
sooner or later.
>>BLECK: Correct, he knew that
this person's coming for me.
So that was the dream.
And I said, OK, so tell me
about that each person is you.
What's that about?
So he says, well,
the people that
are getting murdered are the
parts of me that were destroyed
and killed, my mother destroying
the innocence and pure part
of me by how she treated me.
Then my teachers
and some girlfriends
I have are parts of that
were creative and fun loving
and enjoyed--
>>REGINA: They're all skewered.
>>BLECK: Skewered and
thrown over, and he said,
and even the man himself is
a rageful part of me that
feels rage about what happened.
And I understand that.
And the man wore a plaid
jacket, so, he says,
the checks in there are like
the crossroads of my life,
that I was so angry I
missed opportunities
with relationships and
careers that I blew.
So that's how he interpreted
that and he understood it.
And he went back--
>>REGINA: That's a lot
of insight, though.
>>BLECK: Well, I guided
a little bit in terms
of what person is this?
Who is he?
>>REGINA: Yeah, so it's there
if someone asks the question.
You just wouldn't maybe think
to ask the question yourself.
>>BLECK: Correct,
in the book, they
get an idea in their other
dreams that they can see.
If you just remember
every person is you,
all you have to ask is the
question, what part of me
is that?
>>REGINA: So it always, always
starts making more sense.
Well, I told you.
Before the cameras
started rolling,
we were sitting here,
doing mic checks and such,
and I said, well, I had a good
one a couple nights ago of ants
stuffing a mattress
with blackberries.
And you said, well,
now what do you
think that-- I haven't a clue.
But then anyway,
after that, then it
triggered just a memory
of something else,
more from childhood.
And I always wondered
about it because it
wasn't for many years that I
actually even questioned it.
But this particular dream,
which was a repetitive dream,
started at about maybe
age four or five,
in which this huge, black
spider-- I'm afraid of spiders.
Black spider, it was
a room-sized spider
would be in the
room, and I noted
that all of the people outside,
my family, everybody else,
was dead.
I couldn't see them, but
I knew they were dead.
And I'm standing there, cornered
by this huge black spider.
And the spider just
telepathically said to me,
you will not be harmed.
And for years, I thought
the spider had actually
killed everybody.
I didn't have any
evidence of that.
It was just an
assumption because I
was afraid of the spider.
But, in fact, they're
saying you're safe.
You will not be harmed.
I never did make sense of that.
I mean, and I still
haven't, except that it
seems as though is was
an early kind of message
that you're being protected.
You have protection, you know?
>>BLECK: Yes, and I think it
was a part of you saying that,
that you were going to
take care of yourself.
You knew how to do it,
and you would be OK.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and that's one
of those childhood dreams that
seems one thing, terrifying.
Oh, they killed everyone.
No, not necessarily, I don't
know why they were dead.
I never saw their
bodies or anything.
>>BLECK: Right, it could be a
comforting thing in a sense.
>>REGINA: Yes, it could have
been a comforting thing,
even though it's the one
thing you're really afraid of.
So that diving a little
deeper, even into something
like that, it just kind
of popped out of nowhere.
I thought, hey.
I just remembered a
dream from my childhood.
And those repetitious
dreams are usually there
to reinforce or teach
us something, right?
>>BLECK: Correct, the
subconscious is talking to us.
And it's trying to get
up to the conscious
in your mind, whether
it's pain or whatever
it wants you to feel.
So we just have to
piece it together,
like an archaeologist
kind of, and one way
that I do it is with
each part is you.
>>REGINA: Yes, I think that's
a good way to go about it.
It's a beginning place to
start making sense of it.
So any final thoughts
on what we, as people,
can-- because I
don't think there's
a family that doesn't have some
dysfunctional-- I don't think
there's a person
that doesn't have
some dysfunctional behavior
that we have stuffed down.
What is it going to take for
us to just first acknowledge it
even?
>>BLECK: Well, you don't want
to go through life that way
because you're
limiting yourself.
So what you want to
do, you want to get
to the source of
the pain, what's
happening, with the symptom.
You want to relive
it, and then you
want to confront the
source that caused that.
And then if you do all that,
then all those feelings
are released, and
then you can really
be open to the magic and
the wonder that is life.
And I do believe that.
>>REGINA: And is that
how it went for you?
>>BLECK: It did.
It was, yes.
>>REGINA: Very good, well,
thank you so much for your time
and for writing the book.
And I'd seriously consider
writing something.
You don't have to write
about depressing topics,
but use those skills.
>>BLECK: Well,
you're really kind.
I thank you for
your graciousness.
>>REGINA: I'm sure all of
us saw bits of ourselves
in these stories
and realized what
a shame it is to be held hostage
to our own personal history.
Hopefully, this is the
start of self-recognition.
Again, the name of the book
is "Give Back the Pain."
until next time, thank you
for joining us here on Gaia.
[THEME MUSIC]